---
title: Deductive Controller Synthesis for Probabilistic Hyperproperties
authors: [Roman Andriuschenko, Ezio Bartocci, Milan Češka, Francesco Pontiggia, Sarah Sallinger]
style: fill
color: primary
description: We present a deductive algorithm for the POMDP controller synthesis problem against probabilistic hyperproperties specifications.
venue: QEST 2023
---


## Deductive Controller Synthesis for Probabilistic Hyperproperties

Roman Andriuschenko, Ezio Bartocci, Milan Češka, Francesco Pontiggia, Sarah Sallinger

Probabilistic hyperproperties specify quantitative relations between the probabilities of reaching different target sets of states from different initial sets of states. This class of behavioral properties is suitable for capturing important security, privacy, and system-level requirements. We propose a new approach to solve the controller synthesis problem for Markov decision processes (MDPs) and probabilistic hyperproperties. Our specification language builds on top of the logic HyperPCTL and enhances it with structural constraints over the synthesized controllers. Our approach starts from a family of controllers represented symbolically and defined over the same copy of an MDP. We then introduce an abstraction refinement strategy that can relate multiple computation trees and that we employ to prune the search space deductively. The experimental evaluation demonstrates that the proposed approach considerably outperforms HYPERPROB, a state-of-the-art SMT-based model checking tool for HyperPCTL. Moreover, our approach is the first one that is able to effectively combine probabilistic hyperproperties with additional intra-controller constraints (e.g. partial observability) as well as inter-controller constraints (e.g. agreements on a common action).
