---
title: From Polynomial Invariants to Linear Loops
authors: [George Kenison, Anton Varonka, Laura Kovacs]
style: fill
color: primary
description: We prove the existence of non-trivial loops with linear updates for polynomial invariants generated by pure difference binomials.
venue: ISSAC 2023
---


# From Polynomial Invariants to Linear Loops

George Kenison, Anton Varonka, Laura Kovacs

Loop invariants are software properties that hold before and after every
iteration of a loop. As such, invariants provide inductive arguments that
 are key in automating the verification of program loops.
The problem of generating loop invariants; in particular, invariants
described by polynomial relations (so called *polynomial
invariants*), is therefore one of the hardest problems in software
verification.
In this paper we advocate an alternative solution to invariant
generation. Rather than inferring invariants from loops, we 
synthesise loops from invariants. As such, we generate loops that
satisfy a given set of polynomials; in other words, our synthesised
loops are correct by construction.

Our work turns the problem of loop synthesis into a symbolic
computation challenge. We employ techniques from algebraic
geometry to synthesise loops whose polynomial invariants are
described by *pure difference* binomials. We show that such 
complex polynomial invariants need ``only'' linear loops, opening up
new venues in program optimisation. 
We prove the existence of non-trivial loops with linear updates for
polynomial invariants generated by pure difference
binomials. Importantly, we introduce an algorithmic approach that
constructs linear loops from such polynomial invariants, by 
generating linear recurrence sequences that have specified algebraic relations among their terms.
